README.md, before:

# onshape2xacro

A streamlined exporter for converting Onshape assemblies into high-quality Xacro/URDF robot descriptions.

## Why yet another exporter?

Existing exporters often output flat URDFs or require numerous API calls that can quickly drain out the annual limit. `onshape2xacro` is designed with a different philosophy:

- **Easier to change values in Xacro**: Outputs clean Xacro files instead of flat URDFs. This makes it trivial to tweak joint limits, colors, or physics parameters directly in the code without re-exporting. Also, the generated xacro macro makes it easier to integrate the robot into the project and reduce post-processing need.
- **Saves API calls via Local Processing**: Instead of downloading each part individually via the API, it fetches the entire assembly as a STEP file once. All mesh extraction and inertia calculations are then performed locally using the STEP data, resulting in a much faster and more reliable pipeline.
- **Auto-link Merging**: Automatically identifies and merges parts that are fixed together in Onshape. This produces a clean, simplified kinematic tree that matches how the robot is actually controlled, rather than having a link for every single screw.

## Installation

This project uses `uv` for modern, fast Python package management.

Use uvx directly:

```bash
uvx --from git+https://github.com/qrafty-ai/onshape2xacro onshape2xacro --help
```

or manually clone the repo:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/qrafty-ai/onshape2xacro.git
cd onshape2xacro
uv sync # or pip install -e .
```

## Usage

The export workflow is broken down into modular steps to give you full control over the process:

0. **Prerequisite**: Before exporting, rename all mates you wish to convert into URDF joints using the prefix joint_. This allows the tool to distinguish between your robot's kinematic joints and other assembly constraints.

1. **Auth**: Setup your Onshape API credentials.

    ```bash
    onshape2xacro auth login
    ```

    Follow the prompts to enter your Access and Secret keys. These are stored securely in your system keyring. You can check the status with `onshape2xacro auth status`.

2. **Fetch CAD**: Download the assembly structure and STEP assets.

    ```bash
    onshape2xacro fetch-cad <assembly_url> <local_dir>
    ```

    This generates:
    - `cad.pickle`: Cached assembly metadata.
    - `assembly.step`: The full 3D geometry of the robot.
    - `mate_values.json`: A mapping of joint IDs to their current values.

    Note that due to the limitation of onshape API (see [Limitation](#limitation)) there's no stable enough way to retrieve the current mate values of the assembly automatically. Therefore, the default generated `mate_values.json` are all 0. The preferred way is to make sure you put all mates to 0 before fetching data (you can create a [Name Position](https://cad.onshape.com/help/Content/named-positions.htm) to make this easier). If there's mate that can' be set to `0`, you can modify `mate_values.json` manually to the correct values.

3. **Modify Mate Value** (Optional):
    If you want to export the robot in a specific pose (e.g., a "zero" configuration that differs from the CAD model), edit `<local_dir>/mate_values.json` and adjust the joint angles or translations.

4. **Export**: Generate the final Xacro description.

    ```bash
    onshape2xacro export <local_dir> --output <final_xacro_dir>
    ```

    This processes the local assets, calculates inertias based on geometry and material density, extracts visual/collision meshes, and writes the Xacro files.

5. **BOM Export** (Optional):
    For inertial calculation, you can provide a Bill of Materials (BOM) CSV to specify material densities and mass for different parts:

    ```bash
    onshape2xacro export <local_dir> --output <final_xacro_dir> --bom <path_to_bom.csv>
    ```

    BOM can be exported from onshape's assembly page, make sure to include `Name`, `Material`, and `Mass` columns into the bill and make sure their values are presented:
    ![BOM Example](./assets/bom_example.png)

    The inertia calculation assumes that the part's mass is uniformly distributed (which is true for metals but not the case for 3D-printed parts).

## Limitation

### Requires zeroing robot pose before export

**Why is manual input required?** To correctly align the URDF joints with the exported STEP geometry, the tool requires the specific values of every mate at the time of export. However, the current Onshape API ([getMateValues](https://cad.onshape.com/glassworks/explorer/#/Assembly/getMateValues)) does not support recursive retrieval and only returns data for the root assembly. Consequently, you must manually specify the mate values for any joints located inside sub-assemblies to ensure the kinematic chain matches the link meshes.

### Limited type of mates supported

Currently only revolute mates supported, PRs are welcome!

## Acknowledgements

- **[onshape-robotics-toolkit](https://github.com/onshape-robotics/onshape-robotics-toolkit)**: This project directly utilizes the toolkit for CAD communication and kinematic graph construction.
- **[onshape2robot](https://github.com/Rhoban/onshape2robot)**: We take great inspiration from the pioneering work of the `onshape2robot` project.

Commit message:

fix: correct inertia calculation and mesh matching logic (#6)
* fix(mesh): improve step part matching with location-based fallback

- Implement location-based shape matching to correctly select the geometry instance that matches the target part's position (e.g. Left vs Right gripper motors).
- Add 'mesh_match' status to part metadata for better debugging.
- Add fallback for parsing export IDs from label names.

* fix(inertia): improve mass calculation and fuzzy matching

- Prevent parts not in BOM from inheriting the full link assembly mass.
- Improve fuzzy matching logic to handle case, spacing, and punctuation differences.
- Lower fuzzy match length threshold to 3 to catch short part names like '4310' or 'J1_A'.
- Sort BOM entries by length to prioritize specific matches over generic substrings.

* feat(report): add total robot weight to inertia debug report

- Calculate and display the sum of all link masses at the top of the debug report.
- Useful for verifying overall physical consistency against known specs.

* chore: update gitignore

- Ignore ORT debug log files and config (ORT.*) generated during export.
- Clean up other patterns.

* docs: add inertia debugging tip

- Mention 'inertia_debug.md' in README as a resource for verifying mass properties.

README.md, after:

# onshape2xacro

A streamlined exporter for converting Onshape assemblies into high-quality Xacro/URDF robot descriptions.

## Why yet another exporter?

Existing exporters often output flat URDFs or require numerous API calls that can quickly drain out the annual limit. `onshape2xacro` is designed with a different philosophy:

- **Easier to change values in Xacro**: Outputs clean Xacro files instead of flat URDFs. This makes it trivial to tweak joint limits, colors, or physics parameters directly in the code without re-exporting. Also, the generated xacro macro makes it easier to integrate the robot into the project and reduce post-processing need.
- **Saves API calls via Local Processing**: Instead of downloading each part individually via the API, it fetches the entire assembly as a STEP file once. All mesh extraction and inertia calculations are then performed locally using the STEP data, resulting in a much faster and more reliable pipeline.
- **Auto-link Merging**: Automatically identifies and merges parts that are fixed together in Onshape. This produces a clean, simplified kinematic tree that matches how the robot is actually controlled, rather than having a link for every single screw.

## Installation

This project uses `uv` for modern, fast Python package management.

Use uvx directly:

```bash
uvx --from git+https://github.com/qrafty-ai/onshape2xacro onshape2xacro --help
```

or manually clone the repo:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/qrafty-ai/onshape2xacro.git
cd onshape2xacro
uv sync # or pip install -e .
```

## Usage

The export workflow is broken down into modular steps to give you full control over the process:

0. **Prerequisite**: Before exporting, rename all mates you wish to convert into URDF joints using the prefix joint_. This allows the tool to distinguish between your robot's kinematic joints and other assembly constraints.

1. **Auth**: Setup your Onshape API credentials.

    ```bash
    onshape2xacro auth login
    ```

    Follow the prompts to enter your Access and Secret keys. These are stored securely in your system keyring. You can check the status with `onshape2xacro auth status`.

2. **Fetch CAD**: Download the assembly structure and STEP assets.

    ```bash
    onshape2xacro fetch-cad <assembly_url> <local_dir>
    ```

    This generates:
    - `cad.pickle`: Cached assembly metadata.
    - `assembly.step`: The full 3D geometry of the robot.
    - `mate_values.json`: A mapping of joint IDs to their current values.

    Note that due to the limitation of onshape API (see [Limitation](#limitation)) there's no stable enough way to retrieve the current mate values of the assembly automatically. Therefore, the default generated `mate_values.json` are all 0. The preferred way is to make sure you put all mates to 0 before fetching data (you can create a [Name Position](https://cad.onshape.com/help/Content/named-positions.htm) to make this easier). If there's mate that can' be set to `0`, you can modify `mate_values.json` manually to the correct values.

3. **Modify Mate Value** (Optional):
    If you want to export the robot in a specific pose (e.g., a "zero" configuration that differs from the CAD model), edit `<local_dir>/mate_values.json` and adjust the joint angles or translations.

4. **Export**: Generate the final Xacro description.

    ```bash
    onshape2xacro export <local_dir> --output <final_xacro_dir>
    ```

    This processes the local assets, calculates inertias based on geometry and material density, extracts visual/collision meshes, and writes the Xacro files.

5. **BOM Export** (Optional):
    For inertial calculation, you can provide a Bill of Materials (BOM) CSV to specify material densities and mass for different parts:

    ```bash
    onshape2xacro export <local_dir> --output <final_xacro_dir> --bom <path_to_bom.csv>
    ```

    BOM can be exported from onshape's assembly page, make sure to include `Name`, `Material`, and `Mass` columns into the bill and make sure their values are presented:
    ![BOM Example](./assets/bom_example.png)

    The inertia calculation assumes that the part's mass is uniformly distributed (which is true for metals but not the case for 3D-printed parts).

    To debug the inertial calculation, inspect the generated `inertia_debug.md` file in the output directory and compare with [calculated values](https://cad.onshape.com/help/Content/massprops-asmb.htm?cshid=massprops_assembly) from onshape.

## Limitation

### Requires zeroing robot pose before export

**Why is manual input required?** To correctly align the URDF joints with the exported STEP geometry, the tool requires the specific values of every mate at the time of export. However, the current Onshape API ([getMateValues](https://cad.onshape.com/glassworks/explorer/#/Assembly/getMateValues)) does not support recursive retrieval and only returns data for the root assembly. Consequently, you must manually specify the mate values for any joints located inside sub-assemblies to ensure the kinematic chain matches the link meshes.

### Limited type of mates supported

Currently only revolute mates supported, PRs are welcome!

## Acknowledgements

- **[onshape-robotics-toolkit](https://github.com/onshape-robotics/onshape-robotics-toolkit)**: This project directly utilizes the toolkit for CAD communication and kinematic graph construction.
- **[onshape2robot](https://github.com/Rhoban/onshape2robot)**: We take great inspiration from the pioneering work of the `onshape2robot` project.
